---
title: 'CheckQC: Quick quality control of Illumina sequencing runs'
tags:
- illumina
- ngs
- quality control
- mps
- sequencing
authors:
- name: Matilda Åslin
  orcid: 0000-0002-2450-6415
  affiliation: 1
- name: Monika Brandt
  orcid: 0000-0002-8184-9465
  affiliation: 1
- name: Johan Dahlberg
  orcid: 0000-0001-6962-1460
  affiliation: 1
affiliations:
- name: Department of Medical Sciences, Molecular Medicine and Science for Life Laboratory Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden
  index: 1
date: 26 January 2018
bibliography: citations.bib
---

# Introduction

The last quarter of 20th century has been marked by the drive to decode genes and later whole genomes,
giving rise to the field of genomics [@Lander2001]. In order to study the genome it is essential to know the
sequential order of nucleotides in the DNA sequence. The process of determining this order is
referred to as DNA sequencing. These technologies are not limited to the study of DNA, but can
also be used in a wide variety of other applications such as studying the transcriptome (RNA sequencing)
and epigenetic modifications of the DNA itself. One of the most widely used technologies for DNA sequencing
is the sequencing-by-synthesis solution provided by Illumina Inc [@Mardis2017]. Sequencing is typically carried out
at sequencing core facilities that offer sequencing as a service [@Spjuth2016].

CheckQC was created to quickly assess the quality of a sequencing run specifically aimed at
facilities using Illumina sequencing technology. CheckQC requires that the raw data is processed
by the bcl2fastq software [@bcl2fastq] provided by Illumina. In just a few seconds, CheckQC gathers statistics
from the sequencing run and returns warnings about any metrics not fulfilling previously specified
quality control (QC) criteria. Furthermore, the exit code returned by the program indicates whether all
the criteria were met. This feature makes it easy to plug CheckQC into a sequencing data processing workflow,
which can be aborted if quality criterias are not met. The metrics to check and thresholds used for
QC are specified in a configuration file, making CheckQC easily adapted to the specific needs of any
user or core facility.

One widely used quality control software is FastqQC [@fastqc], which focus on assessing the quality of
individual samples. While CheckQC also evaluates criteria on a sample level, it delivers two
other perspectives on the data that are not addressed by the existing software. Firstly, CheckQC
evaluates criteria for the run as a whole, which is generally important from a core facility
perspective. An example of this is that it provides confirmation that a sequencing run as a whole
has generated a sufficient amount of data according to the pre-defined QC thresholds. Secondly, it
contains a feature of setting thresholds for different QC criteria based on instrument and/or run
type and evaluates these criteria automatically, which to the best of our knowledge, is not supported
by existing software.

Another software library which focuses on working with Illumina data from a sequencing run perspective
is basecallQC [@basecallQC]. This is a library for the R [@R] programming language, which allows the user
to perform utility actions related to a sequencing run, as well as create summary reports. It does not, 
however, provide built in functionality to assess whether quality control thresholds are fulfilled or not, 
nor does it provide a commandline interface to the user.

# Features

 - Support for the following Illumina instrument types: HiSeq2500, HiSeqX, MiSeq and NovaSeq.
 - QC criteria are specified based on instrument type and/or run configuration.
 - Thresholds are set on a error and/or warning level, where QC evaluations only
 reporting warnings will result in a successful run completion, while errors will not.
 This way CheckQC can easily be incorporated in an automated workflow, e.g. that implemented
 with Arteria [@Dahlberg2017], where the exit code can be examined to decide whether to proceed in a workflow or not.
 - CheckQC can be run as a command-line application or as a web service.
 - CheckQC currently supports parsing of Illumina InterOp files and Stats.json
 (generated by Illumina software bcl2fastq2 since version 2.18).
 - CheckQC is designed to be extendable, thus allowing new input file formats to be parsed,
 and new types of criteria to be added with ease.

# References

